---
# Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
# To modify the layout, see htthttps://pixabay.com/get/ec3cb20c29f71c22d9584518a33219c8b66ae3d01ab1144694f9c07b/children-593313_1920.jpgps://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults

layout: home
entries_layout: grid
image:
 path:  kerntran.github.io/assets/image/header.png
---

Liner notes for the films, *Kernels and transformations*

Wayne O'Neil
November 2017

On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union orbited a satellite, Sputnik 1; Sputnik 2 (with the doomed dog Laika on board) on 3 November 1957; and sent Yuri Gagarin into space on 12 April 1961. Although U.S. intelligence knew that the Russians had an advanced space program and were preparing to launch satellites, the actual events shocked the U.S. public and were quickly translated into the alarming belief that the Soviet Union was winning the Cold War race to control outer space because of its superior scientific and technical research—and education.

Propaganda generated by the launching of Sputnik led to the National Defense
Education Act and to increased federal support of science education. Thus, the already existing Physical Science Study Committee at MIT received a significant increase in federal funding, as did the newly established Biological Sciences Curriculum Study group at the University of Colorado and various mathematics study groups. These groups were the source of the New Physics, New Biology, and New Math school curriculums.

Although a New English curriculum could hardly have been argued to aid in U.S. domination of outer space, the National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE), nevertheless—in 1961, successfully lobbied the U.S. Office of Education to fund Project English. Initially it consisted of twelve centers dedicated to creating new language arts curriculums. For further discussion of Project English, see O’Neil 2007, Project English: Lessons from curriculum reform past (Language and Linguistics Compass 1: 612–623): http://web.mit.edu/waoneil/www/k12/project_final.pdf

The main NCTE lobbyist, Albert Kitzhaber, having been granted one of the centers, offered it to the University of Oregon, where it was reluctantly accepted. I was then the kept linguist in the Oregon Department of English, and already teaching linguistics, Old and Middle English, and Old Norse/Icelandic with support from the National Defense Education Act—in preparation for a Viking invasion, perhaps.

As Oregon’s Project English—the Oregon Curriculum Study Center, took root at the university, I took on the task of developing the grammar part of a eventh-to-twelfth grade grammar, rhetoric, and literature curriculum for trial in several school districts in the Pacific Northwest—from Seattle WA to Eugene OR. Transformational grammar was then on many grammarians’ minds, and on mine, too, for although I was raised as a structural linguist, I had caught the MIT fever in 1961. So, I successfully argued for basing the grammar part of the curriculum on transformational grammar, as I then understood it.

The work proceeded as follows: During the summers of 1963 and 1964, I taught linguistics to the teachers who had been selected to pilot the material. On  he basis of their superior work in the linguistics course, a few of the teachers were asked to participate, along with me, in the development of the linguistics lessons. These lessons were then piloted during the 1963-64 and 1964-65 school years. And so matters were to proceed for six years until a secondary curriculum was fully developed, tested, and ready for publication.

However, as is often the case with best-laid plans, stuff can happen to disrupt them. This was the stuff: In spring 1963, Noam Chomsky was persuaded to detour on his way to a Western Psychological Association meeting in San Francisco and to spend a day lecturing at the University of Oregon. The morning after, prior to his leaving, Chomsky invited me to spend the 1964-65 academic year at MIT as a visitor to the linguistics program. In those early years of the New Linguistics, MIT not only had a thriving PhD program, but it was also proselytizing through its extensive visiting scientist program.

The film series Kernels and transformations, covering the essence of the summer courses, was made during the summer of 1964. It was meant to ensure my presence during my post-doc year at MIT. But, enticed by MIT and Harvard, I didn’t return; so the films ended up serving a different purpose: to promote the Oregon curriculum, to educate teachers who might use it and parents whose children might be subjected to it.

Why the series title? In Chomsky’s 1957 Syntactic structures grammatical model, kernel is a technical term for a simple, active, declarative sentence generated by a set of phrase structure rules and obligatory transformations (subject-verb agreement, particle movement, etc.). Other types of sentences (e.g., passives, questions, negatives, etc.) were generated by phrase structure rules plus both optional and obligatory transformations — single-base transformations, since the rules affected the structure underlying one kernel sentence. Double-base transformations, also optional, brought two kernel structures together, as in the generation of sentences with relative clauses, compound sentences, etc. On this model, you were guaranteed kernel sentences, and you could also either generate passive sentences, complex sentences, etc., or not. But it took kernels and transformations to generate all the well-formed sentences of a language.

Between making the films in the summer of 1964 and my arriving at MIT in fall 1964, the Syntactic structures model had been entirely replaced by the  tandard Theory of Chomsky’s Aspects of the theory of syntax (1965). Thus the four technical films in this series on phrase structure rules and transformational rules are of historical interest only. The first three films, less focused on the Syntactic structures model, and the eighth film of a class of eighth graders demonstrating the Oregon Curriculum hold up quite well, given that they were made more than fifty years ago.

Finally, why care about these films now, some fifty-two years after their distribution by McGraw Hill? Stony Brook University linguist Richard Larson was the first to care. Having learned of the films from mention of them in my article on Project English, he was determined to find them, and find them he did. Through the sleuthing of SBU librarian Donna Sammis and my former Oregon colleague Bill Cadbury, the films were tracked down to Indiana University’s Moving Image Archive, which, as far as is known, holds the only extant set of Kernels and transformations. Once it was found it was just a matter of IU film archivist Andy Uhrich working out copyright details so that he could make DVD copies for Larson and me. In this way, a piece of the history of linguistics in the school curriculum has been rediscovered, preserved, and made available for you to see. So thanks to Richard, Donna, Bill, and Andy, you can break out the popcorn, kick back, and have a big time at the movies!